# Interop

## Annotations

Metro supports user-defined annotations for common annotations. This means that a user doesn’t necessarily have to use Metro’s annotations if they’re introducing it to an existing codebase. Support varies depending on the annotation’s use case.

Compile-only annotations are mostly supported. This includes the following:

* `@AssistedFactory`
* `@AssistedInject`
* `@Assisted`
  * Includes Dagger's `@Assisted.value` custom identifiers. While Metro's native `@Assisted` uses parameter names for matching, Dagger's explicit `value` identifiers are fully supported when using Dagger's annotations.
* `@BindsInstance`
* `@Binds`
* `@ContributesBinding`
* `@ContributesTo`
* `@DependencyGraph.Factory`
* `@DependencyGraph`
* `@ElementsIntoSet`
* `@Inject`
* `@IntoMap`
* `@IntoSet`
* `@MapKey`
* `@Module`
* `@Multibinds`
* `@Provides`
* `@Qualifier`
* `@Scope`

These are configurable via Metro’s Gradle extension.

```kotlin
metro {
  interop {
    assisted.add("dagger/assisted/Assisted")
  }
}
```

For Dagger and KI specifically, there are convenience helper functions.

```kotlin
metro {
  interop {
    // Dagger
    includeDagger()
    includeAnvilForDagger()

    // kotlin-inject
    includeKotlinInject()
    includeAnvilForKotlinInject()
    
    // Guice
    includeGuice()
  }
}
```
!!! warning
    Dagger's special-case `@Reusable` and `@LazyClassKey` annotations are not supported in Metro.

`@DependencyGraph` is replaceable but your mileage may vary if you use Anvil or modules, since Metro’s annotation unifies Anvil’s `@MergeComponent` functionality and doesn’t support modules.

Anvil’s `@ContributesMultibinding` is supported as `@ContributesInto*` in Metro and interpreted accordingly for Set/Map scenarios.

kotlin-inject-anvil’s `@ContributesBinding(multibinding = true)` is supported and automatically routed through as a `@ContributesIntoSet` contribution.

`binding` in Metro uses a more flexible mechanism to support generics, but interop with Anvil's `boundType: KClass<*>` property is supported.

## Components

Metro graphs can interop with components generated by Dagger and Kotlin-Inject. These work exclusively through their public accessors and can be depended on like any other graph dependency.

```kotlin
@DependencyGraph
interface MetroGraph {
  val message: String

  @DependencyGraph.Factory
  fun interface Factory {
    fun create(
      @Includes daggerComponent: DaggerComponent
    ): MetroGraph
  }
}

@dagger.Component
interface DaggerComponent {
  val message: String

  @dagger.Component.Factory
  fun interface Factory {
    fun create(@Provides message: String): DaggerComponent
  }
}
```

Conversely, kotlin-inject and Dagger components can also depend on Metro graphs.

```kotlin
@DependencyGraph
interface MessageGraph {
  val message: String

  // ...
}

// Dagger
@Component(dependencies = [MessageGraph::class])
interface DaggerComponent {
  val message: String

  @Component.Factory
  fun interface Factory {
    fun create(messageGraph: MessageGraph): DaggerComponent
  }
}

// kotlin-inject
@Component
abstract class KotlinInjectComponent(
  @Component val messageGraph: MessageGraph
) {
  abstract val message: String
}
```

## Runtime

### Dagger

Enabling dagger interop also enables more advanced _runtime_ interop with Dagger/Javax/Jakarta's `Provider`/`Lazy` types.

```kotlin
metro {
  interop {
    includeDagger()
  }
}
```

This specifically enables three features.

1. Interop with Dagger/Javax/Jakarta's `Provider` and `Lazy` runtime intrinsics.
2. Interop with generated Dagger factories for constructor-injected classes, assisted-injected classes, member-injected classes, and Dagger modules. This means that Metro can _natively_ reuse an upstream class or module that was processed with the dagger compiler (or Anvil, if using its factory generation) and has a generated factory/injector class.
3. Interop with Dagger's `@BindsOptionalOf` annotation.

Note the companion Gradle plugin automatically adds an extra `dev.zacsweers.metro:interop-dagger` runtime dependency to support this interop. If you only want annotation interop, just replace the annotations only.

### `Class`/`KClass` map key interop

A special opt-in form of interop exists for `java.lang.Class` and `kotlin.reflect.KClass` on JVM/android compilations. While these types are not intrinsics of each other in regular code, they _are_ in annotations and are often used in `Map` multibindings. Metro can support these if you enable the `enableKClassToClassMapKeyInterop` option. When enabled, `java.lang.Class` and `kotlin.reflect.KClass` are treated as interchangeable in map key types, matching Kotlin's own annotation compilation behavior. This only applies to map keys because these are the only scenario where annotation arguments are materialized into non-annotation code (i.e. `@ClassKey(Foo::class) -> Map<Class<*>, V>`).

This is disabled by default (even if other framework interops like `includeDagger` are enabled) because this is purely for annotations interop and potentially comes at some runtime overhead cost to interop since `KClass` types are still used under the hood and must be mapped in some cases. It's recommended to migrate these to `KClass` and call `.java` where necessary if possible.

### Guice

Enabling Guice interop enables annotation interop with the following Guice annotations:

- `@Inject` (but not `@Inject.optional`)
- `@Provides`
- `@Assisted`
  - Includes Guice's `@Assisted.value` custom identifiers. While Metro's native `@Assisted` uses parameter names for matching, Guice's explicit `value` identifiers are fully supported when using Guice's annotations.
- `@AssistedInject`
- `@BindingAnnotation`
- `@ScopeAnnotation`
- `@MapKey`
- `@ProvidesIntoMap`
- `@ProvidesIntoSet`

Enabling this also enables _runtime_ interop with:

- Guice's `Provider` type. This means that you can use Guice's `Provider` type interchangeably with Metro's `Provider` type.
- Jakarta's `Provider` type.
- Guice modules
    - Only `@Provides` declarations are supported. `configure` implementations (including anything that would go in them) are not.

```kotlin
metro {
  interop {
    includeGuice()
  }
}
```

Note the companion Gradle plugin automatically adds an extra `dev.zacsweers.metro:interop-guice` runtime dependency to support this interop.

!!! question "Why not javax.inject?"
    Guice dropped support for javax.inject in 7.0.0.

## Diagnostics

When interoping with annotations that are written in Kotlin and have parameters, it may be unsafe to rely on positional arguments. Metro's own annotations often have the same indices, but not always! If you want to be super safe, you can enable the `interopAnnotationsNamedArgSeverity` to `WARN` or `ERROR` to report diagnostics for positional arguments in any custom annotations that Metro is configured to look at.

!!! question "Why only Kotlin annotations?"
    This is because the Kotlin compiler doesn't support positional arguments for annotations that are written in Java.